*When the subject is purely security, QubesOS is not reliable!*
(Written by FlyWithMe - A SimpleX chat user)

# Publication date: 2026/01/04 #

The aim of the following article is to provide constructive criticism of the Linux distro Qubes OS (or XenOS), highlighting its weaknesses, strengths, and then suggesting possible improvements. Finally, it proposes better, more robust, and reliable alternatives, particularly in terms of security, for different types of users.


# 1 — Xen Hypervisor: 

	Virtual machines run on a hypervisor, Xen in the case of QubesOS. Xen is a type 1 hypervisor, meaning it operates at the physical hardware level (bare metal), i.e., it has direct contact with the hardware (Ring 0). This implies that virtualization does not automatically guarantee greater security compared to direct execution on the hardware: although the hypervisor isolates and manages VM resources, it also becomes a single point of trust. A hardened kernel can incorporate many specific protection mechanisms; if the hypervisor is poorly designed, has bugs, or is compromised, the impact can be greater than an equivalent failure in the kernel of a physical machine. Hardware/firmware vulnerabilities (e.g., microcode flaws, speculative execution bugs) can also affect isolation.
	
	In reality, with Intel and AMD's virtualization extensions (VT-x and AMD-V), the hypervisor does not run in the guest's Ring 0: it runs in VMX root mode / host mode (the so-called logical "ring −1"), while the virtual machine kernel continues to see itself as Ring 0, but in practice runs in VMX non-root mode / guest mode. This gives the hypervisor additional control and privileges over the hardware and VMs; therefore, if the hypervisor is compromised, the impact and scope of the attack can be much greater.

	Furthermore, Xen offers a form of virtualization known as paravirtualization. Paravirtualization is a virtualization technique that involves modifying the guest operating system, providing a software interface to virtual machines that is very similar to, but not identical to, the underlying hardware. Paravirtualization eliminates the need for full hardware emulation, providing faster task execution and better overall performance. However, in paravirtualization, the guest operating system knows it is running in a virtual environment; this allows direct communication between the guest operating system and the hypervisor. 
	The guest OS uses "hypercalls" to communicate with the hypervisor. The requirement for direct communication via hypercalls creates a strong dependency between the operating system and the hypervisor, increasing the attack surface and potential vulnerabilities. Any changes or updates can lead to compatibility difficulties, potentially breaking virtualization. There are other opportunities for misconfigurations or vulnerabilities. This is the price to pay when choosing usability over security.

	Currently Xen has support for Hardware-assisted virtualization (Xen calls it hardware virtual machine (HVM)), it's a way of improving overall efficiency of hardware virtualization using help from the host processors (Intel VT-x, AMD-V). Now a full virtualization is used to emulate a complete hardware environment, or virtual machine, in which an unmodified guest operating system (using the same instruction set as the host machine) effectively executes in complete isolation. Xen offers five approaches to running the guest operating system but only the Microsoft Windows template in Qubes OS support fully hardware-assisted virtualization, all other form of virtualization involve paravirtualization which is much less secure than...

	There is a much secure form of virtualization than paravirtualization, called "Full Virtualization". Full virtualization is a virtualization technique that completely simulates the underlying hardware in a virtual machine (VM). The VM is fully isolated from the host system, simulating the hardware environment to run an unmodified guest operating system (OS). Full virtualization establishes a virtual environment that emulates the physical hardware of a computer system. 
	Unlike other virtualization methods, it does not require modifications to the operating system (OS) to create virtual machines (VMs) or manage resources. This allows guest operating systems to function as though they have exclusive control over critical resources such as the CPU, memory, and storage. The result is a virtualization solution that provides robust performance and strong isolation for security. But of course this has a price, which is the lowest performance and the greater use of resources. Examples of Full Virtualization with Hardware-assisted virtualization are: KVM (Linux), Hyper-V (Windows), VirtualBox (type 2 hypervisor) and VMM (OpenBSD).

	Several attacks on Qubes OS originate in an AppVM, and some historical exploits have used Xen vulnerabilities to escape the guest and compromise Dom0 or other VMs. However, not all attacks go through Xen—there are also vectors via firmware (ME/PSP), drivers, IOMMU, or flaws in Dom0 and SystemVMs. The most important link in the system is also the most vulnerable, so vulnerable that support for the use of OpenBSD for dom0 and domU has been officially proposed and debated, with everyone agreeing that it would be very good and extremely beneficial for the security of QubesOS, but this does not happen due to the incompatibility of OpenBSD with Linux and other software.
https://github.com/QubesOS/qubes-issues/issues/4551

	The use of OpenBSD for NetVM (sys-net) was also proposed, due to its extreme vulnerability to attacks. Almost all arguments were in favor, but admitted the impossibility due to incompatibility:
https://github.com/QubesOS/qubes-issues/issues/5294

	But all this would only remedy the inevitable: the hypervisor will always be the weakest link. An OpenBSD running directly on the hardware tends to have a smaller attack surface than when running on a VM, because virtualization adds layers (hypervisor, firmware, drivers) that broaden the risk surface. Many believe that the fact that dom0 does not connect to the internet makes it 100% secure, which is not true. 
	An exploited NetVM can, for example, serve as a starting point for attacks that escape to other VMs or to dom0, compromising the entire system. The fact that dom0 does not have internet access is good for protecting against remote attacks targeting dom0, which attempt to "bypass" the need to escape from a VM to access it; this simply does not protect against the escape of one or more compromised VMs. Logical isolation loses effectiveness if all VMs and services depend on the same underlying platform (in this case, Xen). Even Hyper-V (the Windows hypervisor) has had far fewer CVEs and VM leaks than Xen in recent years, LOL. The Windows virtualizer security model is arguably more mature, especially on supported enterprise hardware, than QubesOS.
	
	I could write another 10,000 lines about why hypervisors/virtual machines are unreliable and insecure, addressing everything from hardware architecture to software. However, I will only quote here a response from Theo the Raadt (creator of OpenBSD) to some OpenBSD users who were in a discussion about the Xen hypervisor and whether OpenBSD intended to implement it or something similar:

	> "Virtualization seems to have a lot of security benefits."

Theo the Raadt:

	"You've been smoking something really mind altering, and I think you should share it.
	
	x86 virtualization is about basically placing another nearly full kernel, full of new bugs, on top of a nasty x86 architecture which
	barely has correct page protection. Then running your operating system on the other side of this brand new pile of shit.
	
	You are absolutely deluded, if not stupid, if you think that a worldwide collection of software engineers who can't write operating
	systems or applications without security holes, can then turn around and suddenly write virtualization layers without security holes.
	
	You've seen something on the shelf, and it has all sorts of pretty colours, and you've bought it. That's all x86 virtualization is."

Full thread - https://marc.info/?l=openbsd-misc&m=119318909016582&w=2

There's still more xD...

	> "In the scientific cluster computing and enterprise spaces, it's already well demonstrated, by many, 
	  many practitioners in those fields that virtualization is a very, very good tool."

Theo the Raadt:
	"So what?  Someone showed up here and said it is actually all about
	security.
	
	That is obviously false to anyone skilled in the field.  You don't
	build better security by building another gigantic layer.  That
	is obvious to anyone who actually works in the field.
	
	The people who are being fooled are just being 'users'.  They need it,
	so they invent all sorts of judgements to make it OK."
	
	> "In the meantime, virtualization provides a great solution for those
	> applications that benefit from running separately & isolated, while"
                                         	 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
	
Theo:	"You believe it does seperation and isolation?"
	
	> "maximizing h/w utilization."
	
Theo:	"This, it does do.  But the people who want to maximize hw utilization
	are trying to lie to themselves about the security aspects.
	You can't run more code and then have less failures."
	
	> "No matter how you twist the logic, however, a VM provides a good level of
	> application domain security, from the standpoint that each set of domain
	> users and applications can only see the services provided within that
	> domain guest OS."
	
Theo:	"The phrase "application domain security" is a cover-up statement that
	means "I have already decided to run the multiple things on one box
	because I am cheap, and I need to invent reasons why I can continue
	doing so"."
 
Theo the Raadt (another response): 
	"It's that extra 4MB of poo code, that is what makes it more secure.
	
	It's slippery and sticky at the same time, so that the application
	attackers slip and slide and fall into the page boundaries.
	
	If the actual hardware let us do more isolation than we do today, we
	would actually do it in our operating system.
	
	The problem is the hardware DOES NOT actually give us more isolation
	abilities, therefore the VM does not actually do anything what the say
	they do.
	
	While x86 hardware has the same page-protection hardware that an IBM
	390 architecture machine has, modern PC machines are a mess.  They are
	architecturally so dirty, that parts of the video, keyboard, and other
	IO devices are interfaced with even to do simple things like context
	switching processes and handling interrupts.  Those of us who have
	experience with the gory bits of the x86 architecture can clearly say
	that we know what would be involved in virtualizing it, and if it was
	so simple, we would not still be fixing bugs in the exact same area in
	our operating system going on 12 years.
	
	We know what a VM operating system has to do to deal with the PC
	architecture.  It is too complex to get perfectly right.
	
	And now you've entered into the layered approach where *any error* in
	the PC model exposed to the client operating system is not just a
	crashing bug -- it is now exploitable.
	
	It might be nice, but it is stupid.  And anyone who thinks there is
	any security advantage at any level knows nothing about PC
	architecture."

	Wow! Theo is a really based guy. Who would have thought that the creator of one of the world's most secure operating systems would be so against virtualization? Does he have the authority and knowledge to talk about it? Yes, I think so, much more than the vast majority of programmers in the world.
	https://theos.com/deraadt/
	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theo_de_Raadt

	The argument most used by the developers of QubesOS is the argument of denial (the first stage of trauma). They say "A hypervisor scape is rare", "these attacks are difficult to make", "you have no reason to worry about it". But the truth is that most hypervisors only benefit from such "security by obscurity", since most malware that infects computers do not aim to exploit a virtual machine because the chances of being inside a virtual machine are lower than in an host operating system, in the same way that most malware is designed to affect Windows and not Linux systems. 
	The attackers naturally do not target hypervisors, but from the moment this begins to become more famous and more users adopt (and is getting, QubesOS and virtual machines is growing a lot) will be a path of no return to the destruction of most hypervisors, especially Xen. And this is mainly due to the fact QubesOS/Xen does not try to hide from the guests VMs that they are VMs. From this we go to the topic number 2.


# 2 — Lack of spoofing: 

	When using any operating system in virtual machines, you don't hide the fact that you're using a virtual machine from the guest system; it's extremely simple and easy to verify, within the guest system, that it's a VM. This is demonstrated, for example, in Windows, through registry keys, virtual machine processes, driver files, and other system files. Inside a Windows VM, you might even receive a system notification indicating that you're in a virtual machine.

	But it is totally possible to mask this and there are even scripts and tutorials on the internet that aim to hide from inside a VM any information about it (On Linux this can be more easy to do because of control):
https://forums.virtualbox.org/viewtopic.php?t=112808
https://github.com/d4rksystem/VMwareCloak

	But QubesOS does not even try to implement any form of spoofing, that is, even a poorly programmed malware can identify that it is inside a VM and try to exploit loopholes to break. The fact that an attacker knows that the target is using a VM can also drawn more attention than normal, just like using VPN + Tor.

	Taking into account that qubes templates are modified images of operating systems, it should not be absurd to implement spoofing. QubesOS can improve on this if the devs want.


# 3 — It's Linux: 

	Qubes OS uses a dom0 based on a version of Fedora and standard Linux kernels; therefore, it is not inherently more secure than running that same outdated Fedora directly on the hardware. You need to compile the kernel with your own parameters if you want to have a minimum of security, but this will certainly break the entire system, because QubesOS is already unstable and incompatible by default (I want to see QubesOS users/developers deny this fact).
	The QubesOS dom0 is maintained on a base, outdated and relatively unprotected/unstable version of Fedora, or you can use Debian for Dom0... which is even worse, but those are the only 2 options currently available. The base Linux does not have decent security mitigations, protections against memory vulnerabilities, and many other problems that come with the Linux kernel and ecosystem. The standard Linux kernel is relatively insecure and unprotected compared to other Linux kernel alternatives or other operating systems kernels.

	A hacked 'sys-net' can spy on the memory of the rest of your qubes. QubesOS devs are always in denial saying things like: "Well those buffer overflows and mem attacks are rare", but this is false, in fact, 66-70% of vulnerabilities in software written in C are related to poor memory management.
	
See my other article proving this - 
"The C language and its biggest problem; proving its insecurity":
https://enjoys.rocks/?cba34693c3575800#BoMTRo1mr21sVCASvSAShR1tk5kPNdT5W6MyqQZ3nKxc, 

	And these cowardly statements from the QubeOS developers makes all this compartmentalization useless because that's what hackers do, they focus on the weakest link. It is "rare" until the operating system starts to be used by many people and attracts the spotlight of the NSA or the FBI (taking into account that Edward Snowden spoke about this operating system, t is likely that it already has). The safety of QubesOS is more based on safety by obscurity than anything else.

	QubesOS can improve this with security kernel patches, such as Grsecurity/PaX and/or linux-hardened kernel support, LKRG, compilation with hardening flags, FORTIFY, PIE, RELRO. And Mandatory Access Control (MAC), such as TOMOYO and SELinux (Fedora templates support SELinux on QubesOS, but outdated, without a good setup (policies) by default, and no support for enforcing without breaking the entire system). 
	
Fedora Secureblue (https://secureblue.dev/) is an example of the bare minimum that must be done to be considered "a reasonably secure operating system", implement kernel patches, changes several system files and have a powerful MAC added with limited namespaces. Something that QubesOS doesn't do.


# 4 — Complexity: 

	Qubes OS is a complex operating system, even for advanced users, which increases the likelihood of human error that could compromise security or anonymity. This contrasts with systems like Secureblue, GrapheneOS, or OpenBSD, which protect users against human error by default and out of the box. In fact, complexity always brings security problems.

I believe I don't need to elaborate on this topic.


# 5 — SystemD: 

	SystemD. Use the "systemd-analyze security" command in your terminal and see what you get with this demonic piece of junk. My challenge to everyone reading this is to try to get the score of each service to at least "OK" without completely breaking the system. I've never seen any idiot SystemD defender open their mouth to defend it after discovering the existence of this command. But the first phase of trauma will always be denial.

More about this topic and why it is so garbage:
SystemD is trash
https://nosystemd.org/
https://ihatesystemd.com/
Suckless devs about this disease:
http://suckless.org/sucks/systemd
Broken by default:
http://ewontfix.com/14/
The world after SystemD:
https://the-world-after-systemd.ungleich.ch/

	QubesOS can improve this by supporting templates from systems without SystemD, such as Artix, Gentoo, Alpine or BSDs. This not only for domU, but for dom0 as well.


# 6 — Bad hardware support and compatibility:

	On the QubesOS Hardware Compatibility List (HCL) page it shows that not even 5% of the existing hardware is 100% compatible with the QubesOS + Linux kernel in its latest versions and HVM (only for windows), IOMMU(required for effective isolation) and SLAT without showing insane problems, this will certainly lead to many basic and even patched security vulnerabilities. 
https://www.qubes-os.org/hcl/
	Having 100% hardware compatibility with this OS is like playing the lottery, not even the devs know for sure which hardware is experimental and which is not, except for the so-called "certified hardware", which are just 11 devices that no one uses and 3 of them no longer receive microcode updates on the CPU.

If you look closely at the "Remark" field (HCL page), you'll see ridiculous bugs and/or workarounds to make the system work, such as:
"No resume after suspend"
"legacy boot (not UEFI)"
"Required workaround for sys-net, read more"
"Need BIOS legacy mode for install"
"Audio, bluetooth, HDMI not working. Display needs thunderbolt (displayport?)."
"sys-net needs to run in PV (paravirtualized mode, wake to black screen, R4.0.4 installer won't work, R4.1 won't work"
"Turn secure boot off, use non-uefi install option"
"Required altering boot args, read more"
"Needs published EFI workaround to boot, Nvidia workaround not to OOPSing during install."
"device instability (webcam, bluetooth adapter) "
"Enable legacy CSM and disable secure boot"
"Occasional momentary performance / freezing / connectivity issues, read more"
"issues with assigning PCI devices"
"Had to remove PCI devices from sys-net."
"Most features work on 3.7 and 3.11, but for best results use 3.9." (Had to downgrade the version, how absurd)
"VDM Mode must be disabled."
"Wifi works, ethernet doesn't" (First time I've seen something like this xD)
"Problems with suspend locking, HVMs crashing. Applied EFI fix, read more"
"Network VM workaround, read more"
"NetVM hangs computer"
"Suspend leaves network frozen"
"Used installer workarounds, read more"
"Works "flawless" after BIOS tweaks, read more"
"bus reset issue with wired network"
"no suspend/reboot; cold boot and normal shutdown work"
"TPM needs downgrading to TPM v1.2 read more" (again xD. At least version 1.2 of TPM has less attack surface.)
"Disabled TPM to get UEFI working"
"To boot the installer, you need to remove mapbs=1 and noexitboot=1 To get suspend to work, you need to add mem_sleep_default=deep to the kernel= line in /boot/efi/EFI/qubes/xen.cfg."
"Runs only with kernel 3.9 read more" (Holy shit, that's crazy)
"AEM works with TPM v1.2 mode, but not v2.0." (Wtf. AEM = Anti Evil Maid)
"Hyperthreading must be disabled (only on i5), actvated TPM slows down the system"
"Intel graphics unusable with enabled VT-d"
"Suspend doesn't work on 3.7.6 kernel, but work on 3.7.4"
"Bios Legacy Mode"
"Upgrade to rc4 broke networking"
"Needed graphics, UEFI workarounds, read more, read more Added TB served devices to sys-net."
"needs older WiFi driver" (Needing an outdated version again.)
"AEM workaround; Compile wifi driver, read more"
"needs kernel downgrade to 3.7.4"
"No IOMMU -- not recommended for Qubes OS!" (For security reasons)
"Issues with UEFI boot and sys-usb; Cannot wake from sleep; read more"

	I could go on, but this doesn't even represent 30% of all the problems reported by users on various hardware. Many require downgrading the kernel, drivers, or operating system version to function "correctly." This is a widespread problem, and QubesOS is decades away from having reasonable (stable and reliable) hardware compatibility; this would require a great deal of effort or even a replacement of developers if the issue at hand is competence. This is not a problem inherent to Linux systems, but rather to Qubes OS.

	So if you don't have any of these following 11 devices know that you won't have full support and compatibility with "all of Qubes' features" (i.e. Basic security features)
https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/user/hardware/certified-hardware/certified-hardware.html#qubes-certified-computers

	And pay attention to what the devs themselves say on their official website:
	
	> "There is a class of security vulnerabilities that can be fixed only by microcode updates. If your computer or the CPU in it no longer receives microcode updates (e.g., because it is too old), it may not be possible for some of these vulnerabilities to be mitigated on your system, leaving you vulnerable."

	And this is because QubesOS strongly needs the ‘Virtualization Technology' of CPUs to function, such as Intel VT-x, Intel VT-d, AMD-V and AMD-Vi. The basis of this OS is the proprietary microcode to support virtualization of CPUs from vendors, any vulnerability in this hardware/microcode fully affects QubesOS. This is so pathetic it's sad, the OS needs proprietary CPU code to function and be secure.
	The security of QubesOS does not come from the OS, but from the competence of Intel and AMD programmers, this only increases the attack surface of the operating system and Xen, instead of reducing it as they mistakenly claim. And that cannot be changed.


# 7 — TPM 1.2/TPM 2.0 requirement/support: 

	QubesOS needs support for TPM 1.2 to implement the basics of AEM (Anti Evil Maid), because without it the system is ridiculously vulnerable to physical attacks, it is even funny that a system that says it is so safe for its defenders becomes weak as a sheet of paper when physically invaded.
https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/user/security-in-qubes/anti-evil-maid.html
	But TPM2 adds more code, firmware, and initrd complexity (tpm2‑tss, dracut/hooks, crypttab, signed UKIs). That raises the boot‑time TCB and operational fragility, misconfiguration can break boot or weaken security. TPM2 relies on vendor (close source) firmware and tpm2-tss implementations, firmware or vendor backdoors/bugs in TPM microcode are a single point of persistent compromise. If TPM firmware (or Intel PTT/ME interactions) is compromised, TPM attestation/sealing can be subverted and used to hide persistent tampering from the user.

	This shit is more a backdoor than anything else. TPM manufactures/suppliers have a unique identification key (EK) that, if linked to a actual identity or shared with thrid parties could allow device identification or linking. And these keys can be easily discovered through the operating system (especially windows), a malware programmed for this can totally deanonymize a QubesOS user through the TPM unique ID, which are hardware identifiers. That is, if you did not buy your device in an 100% anonymous way, it's over! Not to mention all other remote vulnerabilities involving TPM.

	This could easily be mitigated if QubesOS did not support TPM or the most TPM-based features (like OpenBSD, which TPM "Functionality is limited to instructing the device to save its state before a system suspend."), so it would be impossible to access such keys without being physically. And TPM 2.0 is even worse than 1.2, much more code and complexity (In other words, much more attack surface.).

More on this topic from an authority in the field: https://youtu.be/t1eX_vvAlUc

	> "Qubes security guidelines dictate that USB devices should never be attached directly to dom0, since this can result in the entire system being compromised. However, in its default configuration, installing and using AEM requires attaching a USB drive directly to dom0."
	
What the actually fuck? Hahahahahaa, this OS is a contradiction in itself.
	
	> "(The other option is to install AEM to an internal disk. However, this carries significant security implications, as explained here.)" 
	
In other words, to have minimum security you need to do something unsafe that could compromise the system? Good.
	
	> "This presents us with a classic security trade-off: each Qubes user must make a choice between protecting dom0 from a potentially malicious USB drive, on the one hand, and protecting the system from Evil Maid attacks, on the other hand."
	
If you want to fuck me, at least pay for dinner! You're not giving me any plausible options?


# 8 — Intel ME requirement:

Devs: > "If you cleaned your Intel Management Engine with e.g. me_cleaner while installing coreboot (or libreboot) then you are out of luck. For now you have to choose between cleaning your BIOS and deploying Anti Evil Maid."

	This is so fucked, QubesOS needs Intel ME (a literal backdoor) to have minimal protection against Anti Evil Maid.

	Intel Management Engine (ME) runs at a more privileged level than the OS kernel, it can be considered "Ring -3" (Below the CPU or kernel ring 0). Intel ME runs its own proprietary microkernel and firmware on its hardware independent of the BIOS/UEFI and operating system, runs independently of the main CPU. It is turned on and running even after turning off the device and is able to connect to the internet independently and without any action from the device user because:

- Intel ME is powered by a minimum power source while the motherboard is connected to the power (S0ix/Standby/even whit OS shut down). So any power source like a notebook battery or residual energy feeds the IME 24 hours a day.
- IME has access to the network controller (NIC) or can use an integrated network controller managed by ME, allowing for network communication independently.
- Implements a network channel and TCP/IP stack itself or proxy through NIC to receive remote management commands (e.g. wake, KVM, provisioning).
- In modes such as "Out-of-Band" (OOB) the ME responds to special packages sent by the management infrastructure, enabling diagnosis and remote access. This is used by Intel support if your device has any problems, so they can remotely access for analysis and control. This can be done by official website online support... Crazy.

	AMD has something similar called PSP, but it doesn't seem to be able to connect to the internet? Libreboot/Coreboot removes this as well. Furthermore, Libreboot is far superior to UEFI SecureBoot.
https://libreboot.org/docs/linux/grub_hardening.html

	Vulnerabilities or backdoors in these subsystems (Intel ME or AMD PSP) can allow access to VM data or compromise isolation, as they operate at a lower layer than the hypervisor.

More on this topic from an authority in the field: https://youtu.be/B4cOQOXjxew

	The truth is that a physical attack on the device is game over; no TPM, or even less so Intel ME, can protect you against that, against hardware compromise. The goal should be to protect the operating system and the data stored on the disk, and this can be done through software, with FDE (Full Disk Encryption) which supports encryption even of the boot partition; verification of the file system (like NetBSD Veriexec) and/or immutability and the kernel. Because if that device is maliciously compromised physically, at least you can take your HDD/SSD and put it in another computer safely.
	
	There is no guarantee that the TPM, Intel ME, and proprietary firmware code will not already be compromised before you even buy the computer; there is no guarantee of their reliability even through code review, let alone their functionality. On the contrary, the guarantee is that this will increase the attack surface and add more vulnerabilities to your operating system.
	
	> "Does Qubes use full disk encryption (FDE)?"
	> "By default, Qubes OS uses LUKS/dm-crypt to encrypt everything except the /boot partition."

	And that's why QubesOS is so vulnerable to physical attacks and needs two backdoors to "be secure." Meanwhile, there are several Linux systems that support encryption of the /boot partition, or could support it with the correct file system. Other operating systems also have this, such as GrepheneOS, OpenBSD, and NetBSD (NetBSD not by default).


# 9 — Horrible for servers: 

	QubesOS is a real useless piece of junk when it comes to servers. But what does that really say about the system? Well, being extremely secure but useless for servers is a huge contradiction, since a server is what needs security the most in the world of technology. 

	Ever wondered why server-oriented operating systems are so much more secure compared to others that aren't? Windows Server is incomparably more secure than regular Windows, Red Hat Linux is much more secure than Fedora, the same for Ubuntu Server; FreeBSD is incredibly secure, OpenBSD is the most secure BSD and one of the most secure operating systems of all time. And they all have something in common: they were made for servers. One of the biggest pieces of evidence that an operating system isn't secure is the fact that it's bad or useless for servers. (RHEL, FreeBSD, and OpenBSD can also be used for desktops).

	Being good for servers is not just something optional for a system that aims for security, it is about having availability, integrity, scalability, stability and reliability. Good server operating systems naturally need to have many qualities that favor security, a system like QubesOS that is not even stable in terms of hardware cannot and should not consider itself worthy of entering a security debate.

	After all, the qubes were made to be disposable and not permanent, besides QubesOS is not a stable system (I'm going to say this until the word "stability" enters the developers' anus.), all this opposes what a server needs. QubesOS is worthless for safe, available, reliable and stable storage in the long term. The main security tool of QubesOS is the fact that the qubes are disposable is a great way to admit that the system is not safe from attacks directly on it. 
	It is literally the devs admitting: "Qubes OS is safe because if you install malware, you can try to shut down the virtual machine before the malware compromises the system.". It's like running in the rain to avoid getting wet or at least less wet.

	QubesOS can improve on this by ceasing to exist.


# 10 — Networking exposure: trust in NetVMs and the split‑driver model

	Qubes centralizes network access in one or more network‑facing qubes (NetVMs) and uses a split‑driver model that places privileged driver frontends in unprivileged domains, concentrating attack risk on those domains.
	NetVMs are the primary external attack surface. Any remotely exploitable flaw in a network-facing qube (browser rendering engine, SSH, Tor client, VPN daemon, kernel network stack) or in the paravirtualized network device frontends can be used to pivot toward the hypervisor or other qubes. Split drivers reduce driver code in dom0, but expose complex device‑frontends and device‑backend channels (hypercalls, shared memory, event channels) that have been the vector in many hypervisor‑escape designs. Network‑facing qubes routinely need wide protocol stacks and third‑party code (wireless firmware, userland VPNs, DNS, TLS libraries), all large, frequently changed attack surfaces.

	Remote exploitation of NetVMs can yield persistent compromise of network qubes and enable staged attempts at privileged escapes, data exfiltration, or manipulations of other qubes' network traffic. For attackers, NetVM is the main target and the most exposed and vulnerable part of the system.

	QubesOS can improve this by running alternative NetVMs (OpenBSD/Hardened Linux/pfSense/OPNsense). 
The user can improve this by moving parts of the network stack to an external appliance (physical router/firewall or separate hardware VM) to reduce local exposure, but at this point it's better to just stop using this OS and look for something better.


# 11 — Forensics, logging, and incident response limitations

	Qubes' compartmentalization and disposable‑qube model complicate centralized, tamper‑evident logging and post‑incident forensic analysis, reducing assurance after a suspected compromise.
	Effective incident response relies on reliable logs, chain‑of‑custody for evidence, and the ability to reconstruct an attacker's actions. Qubes encourages ephemeral qubes and per‑VM storage; by default logs are scattered across multiple filesystems in different security domains and may be discarded with disposable qubes. Isolated qubes with differing trust levels can intentionally block or tamper with logging for plausible deniability (something that QubesOS is terrible at proving compared to other alternatives like Tails).
	
	This makes it impossible for the user to even discover if their system has been compromised, increasing the damage caused instead of reducing it, and giving the attacker more comfort, making them feel invisible, and they will be.

	After a breach, investigators may find incomplete telemetry, missing cross‑qube event correlation, and lack of secure, centralized audit trails. That reduces the ability to determine scope, persistence, and exfiltration, and it complicates proving whether a host‑level compromise occurred (hypervisor/dom0) versus a guest compromise. For high‑assurance environments this weakens incident handling and forensic confidence. This makes it likely impossible to verify and prove whether your operating system or any of your VMs are compromised, allowing malware to remain active indefinitely without the user's knowledge, increasing the damage caused instead of reducing it, and giving the attacker more comfort, making them feel invisible, and they will be... Do I need to explain why this is terrible? 

	Mitigations and limits: Best practice is to forward immutable, signed logs off‑host to a remote collector under operator control (write‑once storage or secure SIEM); use cryptographic attestation where possible; and maintain dedicated, high‑trust audit qubes with strict ingestion policies. These measures add operational complexity and still require careful threat modeling to avoid introducing new attack channels. At this point, you can just look for something better.


# 12 — Bad for high threat model. Lack of enterprise‑grade vendor support, certified SLAs, and predictable patching.

	Qubes OS is poorly suited for enterprise and regulated environments because it lacks the operational infrastructure that enterprise security depends on. It's terrible for companies looking for a safe system for their threat model. This is not a bug, it is a design choice. However, the consequences are real.

	If Qubes discovers a critical hypervisor vulnerability on a Friday afternoon, there is no SLA requiring a patch within 24 hours.

	Qubes lacks broad commercial vendor support, certified long‑term platforms, and enterprise SLAs (Service Level Agreement) that organizations rely on for managed incident response and guaranteed security updates.

	Enterprises and high‑assurance deployments expect vendor accountability: predictable patch timelines, coordinated disclosure, tested updates for large fleets, and contractual incident response. Commercial server OS vendors (RHEL, Ubuntu LTS, AlmaLinux/Rocky Linux, Windows Server) or OSes with commercial support ecosystems (FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD) provide certified hardware stacks, long support windows, livepatching, and support contracts — all essential for production security operations. Qubes' community‑driven model offers technical guidance and timely advisories for affected components, but it does not replace formal vendor SLAs or large‑scale patch‑validation workflows.

	Organizations adopting Qubes face higher operational risk: ad‑hoc update procedures, limited certified hardware choices, no commercial guarantee of coordinated response at scale, and potential incompatibilities with enterprise management/orchestration tooling. This increases the cost, complexity and uncertainty of deploying Qubes in corporate, critical‑infrastructure, or regulated environments. Also, in addition, Qubes remains limited to ~10 laptop models without vendor validation.

RHEL (Red Hat Enterprise Linux) for example can push patches to +10,000 workstations via satellite:
	https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_satellite/6.2/html/installation_guide
	https://www.reddit.com/r/redhat/comments/c7ycrf/what_are_your_satellite_server_specs/

	Qubes requires manual updates or ad-hoc scripting. For a regulated environment (healthcare, finance), this violates compliance expectations for "vendor-managed" security.
Qubes rejects enterprise reality for experimental (and poor) isolation. BSD operating systems, or even other Linux operating systems, offer compartmentalization, stability, and security (containers, user-space sandboxing, predictable and fast security/bug patches, kernel-level isolation, and mitigations) with vendor accountability, something Qubes cannot match. For enterprises, regulated sectors, or high-risk operations requiring SLAs, BSDs or enterprise Linux OSes are the proven and scalable choice.

# 13 — Security through virtualization, but is that all?

	I'm going to build a straw house but with titanium doors, after all, whoever enters only enters through the doors, right? Doors are made for this, we all know. Although what I said doesn't make any sense, I'm sorry, because I said the word "build", but I'm wrong. Because nothing the QubesOS devs did, they created; not Xen, not Fedora, Debian or Whonix. What they did was gather a pile of mud, stone and pieces of rubbish until they formed something that looked like a house. But the doors... Oh the doors... They're definitely made of titanium...

	QubesOS is a system that places all its security on top of its virtual machines, on top of a hypervisor that its own devs didn't even create, Xen is maintained by other, completely different developers. But what about the rest of the system? Fuck it, right? Why have a consistent, stable and functional system if I can stick 20 virtual machines up my ass? Fuck everything else, right?

	Why use operating systems in virtual machines on a bad hypervisor (Xen) on a weak, unstable and inconsistent system by default when I can use the same operating systems (and much more as QubesOS templates are limited) on a better hypervisor (KVM/QEMU, bhyve) on much more secure, stable and concise systems?

	You can use Whonix on any Linux through KVM/QEMU, which is literally the official Whonix support, why does using Whonix on a weak and unofficially supported hypervisor make you think you would be safer or more anonymous? Use Fedora Secureblue, Alpine, Gento Hardened and other operating systems that are much more secure than QubesOS for this, it's a much smarter thing to do. In addition to being able to use any operating system without problems through full virtualization; QubesOS templates are modified images of OSes made to try to be compatible with Xen. There is no logic in saying that this would be safer than using the same operating system without modification and natively.

	> "The main way Qubes OS provides privacy is via its integration with Whonix. Qubes OS does not claim to provide special privacy (as opposed to security) properties in non-Whonix qubes. This includes disposables."
https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/introduction/faq.html#what-about-privacy-in-non-whonix-qubes

	Yet another statement proving that everything QubesOS "possesses" doesn't belong to them; nothing inherent in this operating system is their own, and they aren't even ashamed to admit it. That's because Whonix is ​​the only VM system that protects against VM fingerprinting and advanced deanonymization attacks. 
	This only increases the complexity of maintaining and organizing the operating system, since Xen, Whonix, Fedora, Debian, and other softwares used in Qubes OS are maintained by different developers with different purposes. If any bugs or security vulnerabilities are discovered in Xen, for example, the Qubes OS developers will be unable to fix them.

	So, once again, why use QubesOS for this when you can use Whonix and virtual machines in more secure and concise systems?


# 14 — Security by Correctness, isolation and randomization >>>> Security by virtualization; and refuting Joanna Rutkowska

	> "The other two popular approaches are "Security by Correctness" and "Security by Obscurity." We don't believe either of these approaches are capable of providing reasonable security today, nor do we believe that they will be capable of doing so in the foreseeable future."
https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/introduction/faq.html#what-about-other-approaches-to-security

	With this statement, the developers of Qubes OS admit that their OS is weak, buggy, and insecure by default, and that all its security is based on:
	
	> "Is Qubes just another Linux distribution? If you really want to call it a distribution, then it's more of a "Xen distribution" than a Linux one."

	Oh yes, XenOS. That sounds much better LOL.

	To save time, I will directly refute Joanna Rutkowska, the "creator" of QubesOS.
	https://blog.invisiblethings.org/2008/09/02/three-approaches-to-computer-security.html
	
	
*Security by Correctness*

	> "The assumption here is obvious: if we can produce software that doesn't have bugs (nor any maliciously behaving code), then we don't have security problems at all."
	
	Correct, just like any and all software that wants to be secure, it needs code auditing. This goes for Xen.

	> "The only problem is that we don't have any tools to make sure that a given code is correct (in terms of implementation, design and ethical behavior)."

	And how do you ensure that the design, implementation and ethical behavior of Qubes OS is correct? This also goes for your operating system, as you had to plan these steps. If these 3 topics you raised are not correct (and they are not, as I have proven in the other topics), Qubes OS security does not exist.

	> "But if we look at various efforts in computer science, we will notice a lot of effort has been made to achieve Security by Correctness: "safe" languages, code verifiers (although not sound ones, just heuristic based), developer's education, manual code audit, etc."
	
	And the same go for the Xen hypervisor and templates. To be reliable (which they are not) they need secure code and developer training. Where did you get that virtualization security eliminates the requirement for secure code? All software needs secure code to be secure. Qubes OS uses the Linux kernel and is vulnerable to the same insecurities.
	
	> "Microsoft's famous Secure Development Life-cycle is all about Security by Correctness."

	False. The life cycle of Windows is due to the greed for money, as it is an operating system with a paid license. In addition to the new features and software that no one asks for with each new version of Windows, which only makes the OS more insecure and with more attack surface. You don't need to have such a short life cycle and no additional support this way, and there are several other better examples you could use.
	
	> "The only problem is: all those approaches sometimes work and sometimes do not, sometimes they miss some bug"
	
	This applies to any and all software development. There is no way to end this, if you think that isolation BY SOFTWARE, (and even by hypervisor, which is worse) is a solution, then you are being stupid and contradictory.
	
	> "and also there are problems that I simple don't believe can be addressed by automatic code verifiers or even safe languages, like e.g. logic/design bugs or deciding on wheatear a given code behaves maliciously or not (after all this is an ethical problem in many cases, not a computer science problem)."
	
	She talks as if her project had not gone through logic and design before implementation, I know that in Qubes OS it was done in a stupid way, but she treats this project of hers as something that transcends reality and physical form, being above men and mortal understanding. In the end, your idea is just another project, another drawing, another logic thought up by people no more qualified than others.
	
	Is there anything to protect me against malicious code, logic/design bugs or wrong implementation of Xen? How about creating another hypervisor to run the Xen hypervisor so I can have security? That's it! Let's isolate the hypervisor with more virtual machines, all stuck up the ass.
	
	Furthermore, it is only possible to know whether the code behaves maliciously or not through extensive auditing, not only of the lines of code but also of the compilation process and binaries. It is possible for open source software to have invisible backdoors hidden in post-compile binaries, and it is not possible to protect against this except through extensive and in-depth auditing. Ultimately, trust should be greater in the programmer than in the software.
	
	See about this in Ken Thompson's famous document, Trusting Trust:
	https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rdriley/487/papers/Thompson_1984_ReflectionsonTrustingTrust.pdf
	
	
*Security by isolation*

	> "Simple as it sound, in practice the isolation approach turned out to be very tricky to implement."
	
	No more than virtualization, I promise.
	
	> "One problem is how to partition the system into meaningful pieces and how to set permissions for each piece. The other problem is implementation - e.g. if we take a contemporary consumer OS, like Vista, Linux or Mac OSX, all of them have monolithic kernels, meaning that a simple bug in any of the kernel components (think: hundreds of 3rd party drivers running there), allows to bypass of the isolation mechanisms provided by the kernel to the rest of the system (process separation, ACLs, etc)."
	
	This statement is not absolutely correct. There are kernel-level and user-space mechanisms that limit the impact of bugs. Properly partitioning and defining policies is difficult. Monoliths expand the attack surface, but modern techniques (LSMs, seccomp, KPTI, hardware mitigators, and driver isolation) reduce the likelihood of systemic compromise.
	
	Nowadays, and depending on the operating system, affecting the entire kernel is extremely more difficult; rarely observed in practice compared to past times. Many of the CVEs found in the Linux kernel mainline are not even applicable in real distributions (Ubuntu, OpenSUSE, Fedora) and depend on a range of factors that are not available in operating systems. Not every CVE can be effectively exploited in practice due to operating system mitigations. Finding a bug is one thing; exploiting it is another. That's what mitigations are for, that's what security through randomization is for—to prevent bugs from being exploited.
	
	Microkernels, exokernels and hybrid kernels may be more secure than a monolithic kernel by design, but it does not necessarily mean that they will be in practice, and it also does not mean that the monolithic kernel will necessarily be insecure.
		
	Kernel exploits in real-world attacks function as post-compromise privilege escalation tools, not as self-sufficient vectors for total compromise. 
	
	> "Obviously the problem is because the kernels are monolithic. Why not implement Security by Isolation on a kernel level then? Well, I would personally love that approach, but the industry simply took another course and decided that monolithic kernels are better then micro-kernels, because it's easier to write the code for them and (arguably) they offer better performance."
	
	Please someone introduce this woman to the technological know-how of kernel-level isolation!
	Namespaces, Capabilities, RCTL, Jails, Zones, Capsicum, Seatbelt, SELinux, AppArmor, vnet, devfs, VFS, Chroot, Smack, Seccomp, LSM hooks, Landlock, SMEP, SMAP, retpoline, NX, DEP, Kernel Page-Table Isolation (KPTI), eBPF/XDP... This woman is crazy if she thinks a virtual machine is the only form of isolation.
	
	And if the problem is the monolithic kernel, why the hell didn't you make Qubes OS based on a micro-kernel but on the Linux kernel? Because you don't have the ability to program a kernel or because you think the only way to isolate is through virtual machines? Or both?
	
	I acknowledge that a microkernel or even a hybrid kernel can be much more secure than a monolithic kernel, however, there is a contradiction in your statements. Qubes uses Xen with a privileged dom0 that runs an outdated and insecure Linux distribution, which controls devices, drivers, and manages other domains (domUs) that are also insecure Linux distributions or even Windows. 
	
	> "Many believe, including myself, that this landscape can be changed by the virtualization technology."
	
	Holy fuck. Here we go again.
	
	> "Thin bare-metal hypervisor, like e.g. Xen, can act like a micro kernel and enforce isolation between other components in the system - e.g. we can move drivers into a separate domain and isolate them from the rest of the system."
	
	You don't need a hypervisor for this, and after all, what isolates the hypervisor? Unlike a kernel, a hypervisor cannot have multiple security protocols that a kernel or micro-kernel can. A hypervisor compromise will cause the same damage as a full kernel compromise, but compromising some part of the operating system on bare metal does not necessarily lead to a full kernel compromise.

	> "Also, how to make sure that the hypervisor itself is not buggy?"
	
	FINALLY SHE THOUGHT OF IT, NOT EVEN THE DEVS OF QUBES OS THOUGHT OF IT.
	
*Security by Obscurity (or Security by Randomization)*

	> "Finally we have the Security by Obscurity approach that is based on the assumption that we cannot get rid of all the bugs (like in Security by Isolation approach), but at least we can make exploitation of those bugs very hard. So, it's all about making our system unfriendly to the attacker."
	
	If the attacker doesn't know how to attack, there's nothing he can do. Different from the hypervisor approach.
	
	> "The obvious disadvantage of this approach is that it doesn't prevent the bugs from being exploited - it only make the meaningful exploitation very hard or even impossible."
	
	"This is a disadvantage as it can make exploiting bugs very difficult or IMPOSSIBLE", holy shit what a genius thought.
	
	> "But if one is concerned also about e.g. DoS attacks, then Security by Obscurity will not prevent them in most cases."
	
	Servers are the ones who have to worry about this, you can't open your mouth to talk about it when your operating system is absolutely useless in this area. Also, how can a fucking DoS attack affect the desktop user? How can this maliciously compromise the operating system or hardware? That's a spurious correlation that you just threw up.
	
	If a DoS attack is carried out against your ISP, home network, or online services you use, nothing can be done, and it is up to the providers of those services to take action.
	
	Protection against DoS is done with hardware isolation, router filters, load balancers, scrubbing farms at the network edge, CDN/Anycast, BGP ACLs, rate-limiting etc. This is the basics of server infrastructure but obviously she doesn't know. After all, the trash she created is no good for this type of adult subject.
	
	> "The other problem with obfuscating the code is the performance (compiler cannot optimize the code for speed) and maintenance (if we got a crash dump on an "obfuscated" Windows box, we couldn't count on help from the technical support)."
	
	If you want to have security you will have to give up usability. The more security, the less usability. The fewer lines of code, the fewer features and the less attack surface.
	Furthermore, this last statement is completely false, OpenBSD is the greatest proof that technical support is completely possible in a system with randomization; After all, there is no operating system with more randomization at the kernel level than OpenBSD, which randomizes the order of all kernel libraries and the kernel layout (KARL - Kernel Address Randomized Link), all without hindering crash dump analysis.
	
	And you're talking about performance when you previously criticized the monolithic kernel and suggested a microkernel, which has far more performance overheads and management complexity. Once again, you're being contradictory.

	> "Finally there is a problem of proving that the whole scheme is correct and that our obfuscator (or e.g. ASLR engine) doesn't introduce bugs to the generated code and that we will not get random crashes later (that we would be most likely unable to debug, as the code will be obfuscated)."
	
	This is not how things work, it is possible to debug and audit the randomization process, making the generated code safe and clean. It's amazing how she doesn't know this, it's basic software engineering. Again, stating that randomization necessarily prevents debugging false.

Other poor arguments from Joanna: https://blog.invisiblethings.org/2012/09/12/how-is-qubes-os-different-from.html

	> "Many people ask how does Qubes OS differ from other approaches to desktop security. Today I'm trying to answer the most popular questions."
	> "First, if you use Xorg or similar X-based server as your GUI server, and this is what nearly all Linux, and most of the other non-Windows OSes use, then you don't have any form of GUI-level isolation, which is essential for a desktop system."
	
	She's never heard of Wayland, which is impressive given that this was published in 2012 and Wayland was implemented in 2010. It's evidence of her obsolescence
	
	> "Second, all mainstream desktop OSes, such as Windows, Linux, BSD, even OSX, are all based on a monolithic kernels, which present a significant security problem."
	> "This is because a typical monolithic kernel of a contemporary desktop OS contains tens of millions of lines of code, and to make it worse, most of this code is reachable from (untrusted) applications via all sorts of APIs, making the attack surface on the kernel huge."
	
	First, what operating systems is she talking about? I even understand her saying this about Linux, given that it is just a kernel and that in 2012 Secureblue and many subsequent security implementations on/of Linux did not yet exist, but generalizing BSDs as if they were all the same is tremendously dishonest or stupid. 
	OpenBSD had existed for many, many years and apparently it was either unaware of its existence or had never tried to study it to find out the approaches adopted by the system to mitigate or end these problems. Furthermore, operating systems such as MacOS and other BSDs have already greatly improved their security through kernel-level isolation, patches and randomization, it does not specify specific vulnerabilities and brings everything together as if it were one thing, she does not even have knowledge about exploit mitigations.
	
	To say that monolithic = insecure is intellectual dishonesty. It's necessary to first evaluate the monolithic kernel in question; furthermore, macOS and Windows use hybrid kernels, which, in design, should be more secure than monolithic kernels, but this is not absolutely true, and some monolithic kernels have already demonstrated superior security, such as OpenBSD's own. 
	The only thing that goes through her head besides wind is "virtualization virtualization virtualization." This is a tremendous mental limitation.
	
	> "In Qubes, on the other hand, we use Xen hypervisor to provide security isolation between domains, and Xen is just a few hundred of thousands lines of code."

	Isolation yes, security no. And these "few" lines of code are already much larger than the entire TempleOS. Furthermore, the attack surface of Qubes OS is not just Xen, but everything (devices, management tools, hypercalls etc.), since not even the /boot partition can be encrypted in this crap system, and what do you do to mitigate this? Nothing, they rely on unreliable proprietary firmware like Intel ME and TPM that only increase the attack surface.
	
	In fact, everything related to hardware can increase the attack surface of QubesOS, as it is the OS that most requires specific hardware firmware and vendor patches to be minimally secure and stable. 
	
	> "It also doesn't need to provide all sorts of APIs to applications, because the Xen hypervisor is essentially only interested in CPU scheduling, memory management and power management, and very few things beyond that."
	> "Most notably, the Xen hypervisor knows nothing about networking, disk storage, filesystems, USB stacks, etc, as all those tasks are delegated to (often untrusted) service VMs."
	
	Delegating drivers to VMs creates IPC/hypercall/grant surfaces that need checking; many XSAs exploit precisely these interactions. You're living in another reality if you think this reduces the attack surface, it just creates more. Delegating stacks (network, USB, disk) to separate domains reduces the impact of bugs on those stacks, but creates new interfaces and privileges (backends, control domains, grant mappings, hypercalls, emulation) that the hypervisor must mediate and validate. In other words, more complexity, more attack surface. Not to mention Pass‑through.
	
	Practical security depends on the threat model (thing that QubesOS is horrible), updates (thing that QubesOS is horrible), total attack surface (hardware + firmware + software) and not just whether it is monolithic or not. The Qubes architecture reduces a certain type of risk (compartmentalization), but it does not eliminate risk and introduces other surfaces that have already been explored in Xen. Lines of code are no substitute for attack surface analysis; therefore monolithic ≠ inherently insecure, nor Xen ≠ inherently secure. The fact is that the vast majority of vulnerabilities found in Xen are serious, which in number already far surpass KVM, by the way.

	While in comparison a minority of vulnerabilities found in operating systems such as OpenBSD, FreeBSD, NetBSD and MacOS are severe (>7.0). This says a lot, it says that exploiting Xen will almost certainly lead to something much more dangerous than exploiting operating systems with a strong foundation in security. And it's obviously due to the fact that Xen runs at ring 0 (logical ring -1, it has more privileges than a kernel) and doesn't have half the mitigations and isolations that an full operating system can provide. Vulnerabilities in hypervisors tend to have a more critical impact.
	
	And even with all this, it is still necessary to have the correct hardware so as not to end up running into more problems and increasing the attack surface even further. It is necessary to have support for IOMMU (for adequate insulation), HVM (to avoid PV, which leads to more insecurity, but Qubes only supports full HVM for Windows template), and preferably not even use AMD, as officially only Intel is recommended.
	
	After that she criticizes type 2 hypervisors and insecure virtual machines, almost completely valid, with the only mistake being that Qubes OS is a magical exception, so I'll skip that.
	
	> "Qubes itself is much more than just the hypervisor."
	
	Finally she admitted the obvious.
	
	> "Qubes is everything that is needed to build a reasonably secure desktop OS on top ofa baremetal hypervisor"
	
	Where the fuck did she get that? Qubes OS is not secure at all compared to other Linux systems and putting all of this on top of a hypervisor makes things worse. 
	
	"everything that is needed to build a reasonably secure desktop OS" And she herself says that she doesn't believe in security mitigations, corrections and secure programming, this is absolutely contradictory. How can Qubes OS be secure if it goes against everything that guarantees the basis of security in the software world?
	
	> "We think Xen is unique because it combines an elegant architecture (type I, baremetal, hypervisor) with a number of practical features, such as power management, support for Intel VT-d and driver domains, support for both para-virtualizaed, and fully-virtualized VMs"
	
	She is redundant when saying "Type 1, baremetal, hypervisor", if it is a type 1 hypervisor then it is baremetal, if it is a baremetal hypervisor then it is type 1, it makes no sense for her to mention this as if it were something exclusive to Xen. She and the Qubes OS devs seem to live in a separate reality, I think they even isolated themselves from reality through Xen somehow. KVM, Hyper-V and VMM (OpenBSD) are other examples of type 1 hypervisors that are more secure than Xen.
	
	Paravirtualization is much less secure than full virtualization as I already said in the first topic of the article, this is literally a negative point of Xen, and QubesOS only supports full virtualization (through HVM) for Windows tamplates, everything else is paravirtualization.

	> "How is Qubes better than Google Chrome OS?"
	> "First, Chrome OS is not a general purpose OS. Second, it's based on Linux with all its security limitation that are a result of using a monolithic kernel"
	
	dom0 and sys-net use which operating system? I'm really starting to believe that she isolated herself from reality by somehow entering Xen.
	
	And ChromeOS is incomparably more secure than QubesOS. The system and kernel files are located on an immutable partition that cannot be changed by apps or malware. It is sandboxing by design, each browser tab, app and service runs isolated with least privileges. It features atomic updates, native user data encryption, and Android/Linux containers. ChromeOS is arguably one of the most secure operating systems in the world, but it is absolute trash when it comes to privacy, which is why I don't recommend it to anyone. But it is certainly safer than QubesFraud.
	
	> "How is Qubes better than [your favorite commercial military-grade certified secure OS]?"
	> "You must have heard about the super secure military-grade, formally verified, 100% certified, and generally "unbreakable" operating systems made by companies such as Green Hills, Lynx Works, and others. How do they compare to Qubes OS?"
	
	Oh, yes. Like the seL4 kernel that GenodeOS uses. Or even OpenBSD and FreeBSD, that although they are not "military-grade", are widely used by governments, security agencies and companies in critical infrastructures (firewalls, appliances, servers), and which macOS, iOS, TrueNAS, pfSense/OPNsense and Junos OS are based on.
	
	> "Really, I have no idea."
	
	Of course not.


# 15 — Refuting the developers' arguments.

https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/introduction/faq.html

	> "Not all virtual machine software is equal when it comes to security."
	
Right, even they admit it, let's see what comes next.

	> "You may have used or heard of VMs in relation to software like VirtualBox or VMware Workstation. These are known as "Type 2" or "hosted" hypervisors."
	> "However, the fact that Type 2 hypervisors run under the host OS means that they're really only as secure as the host OS itself. If the host OS is ever compromised, then any VMs it hosts are also effectively compromised."
	
Absolutely true. This is true for QubesOS too; if dom0 (or even NetVM) is compromised, it's all over. It is intellectual dishonesty on the part of the developers to pretend that this statement does not apply to Qubes OS.

	> "By contrast, Qubes uses a "Type 1" or "bare-metal" hypervisor called Xen. Instead of running inside an OS, Type 1 hypervisors run directly on the "bare metal" of the hardware."
	
That's true, this makes compromising the hypervisor even more dangerous, since its output goes directly to the hardware, or even below the kernel permission level (logical ring -1).
	
	> "This means that an attacker must be capable of subverting the hypervisor itself in order to compromise the entire system, which is vastly more difficult."
	
Absolutely false, this doesn't make things harder for the attacker, it makes them easier, since a type 1 hypervisor is the only layer of protection you'll have between the hardware and the guest VM, a single failure in the hypervisor or in the delegation infrastructure compromises everything. In addition to achieving less isolation, since, as mentioned, Xen runs directly on the hardware.

And you developers know the danger of placing all your hopes on a hypervisor; after all, you created the border color layout for each VM, indicating the trust levels. You dishonest people.

	> "How does Qubes OS compare to using a separate physical machine?"
	> "Using a separate physical computer for sensitive activities can certainly be more secure than using one computer with a conventional OS for everything"
	
True. Therefore, do not use Qubes OS, which aims to centralize everything with the vain proposal of compartmentalization.
	
	> "Physical separation doesn't rely on a hypervisor. (It's very unlikely that an attacker will break out of Qubes' hypervisor, but if one were to manage to do so, one could potentially gain control over the entire system.)"
	
Look how these idiots don't believe in security through correction, kernel isolation and randomization, but believe in Xen as their god, a tool they didn't even create. They place all their hopes on other developers' tools and put them on a pedestal as if they were untouchable; that's stupid.

	> "Physical separation can be a natural complement to physical security. (For example, you might find it natural to lock your secure laptop in a safe when you take your unsecure laptop out with you.)"

That's the smartest thing to do, but you literally recommend the opposite: using a single device for all your life's activities, promising that you'll be protected through compartmentalization.

	> "Physical separation can be cumbersome and expensive, since we may have to obtain and set up a separate physical machine for each security level we need."
	
Exactly the same argument used in the first topic: "I have already decided to run the multiple things on one box because I am cheap, and I need to invent reasons why I can continue doing so".

	> "There's generally no secure way to transfer data between physically separate computers running conventional OSes. (Qubes has a secure inter-VM file transfer system to handle this.)"
	
Have you ever heard of a USB cable? Or better yet, a flash drive? The kind you use to make 100% offline transfers? Or even better, online services with encryption and anonymity? (Onionshare, Wormholle William, etc.).

"No, my love, you don't need to use that. We guarantee your security through our inter-VM system, where you can transfer things from a compromised VM with internet access to a clean VM using the same device. Trust your daddy."

	> "Physically separate computers running conventional OSes are still independently vulnerable to most conventional attacks due to their monolithic nature."
	
And is Qubes OS unconventional? Using a conventional Fedora/Debian template, using the conventional Linux kernel for dom0 and domUs (or windows, which is worse), using conventional GNU libraries and programs? I know that Qubes OS is unique in that it's a huge piece of crap, but that doesn't make it anything other than just another GNU/Linux system. 

With hardware-based partitioning, you can use much more secure Linux systems, or even other secure or non-secure operating systems, without worry.

	> "Malware which can bridge air gaps has existed for several years now and is becoming increasingly common."

What the hell? Unless through physical attack (social engineering, hardware firmware backdoor or exploit) in which QubesOS is also totally vulnerable, or a compromised router, how the hell is malware going to reach an offline (or through the Tor network) computer? Or even through a physical internet separation? What kind of malware is this? It must be some kind of supernatural being; I'd like to see an example of malware that could do this, reach air-gapped devices.

If you're talking about advanced attacks performed on theoretical academic research, like:
	AirHopper/GSMem/USBee — exfiltrate data by modulating electromagnetic emissions or signals via cables to nearby receivers (cell phone/modem).
	Fansmitter/BitWhisper/DiskFiltration — use varying fan speeds, vibration, or electrical signatures to transmit bits to nearby sensors.
	IREXF/LEDitGo/xLED — use LED indicators, displays or infrared lights to optically transmit data to cameras/phones.
	MAGNETO/ODINI — magnetic techniques to exfiltrate data through variations in magnetic fields detectable by nearby devices.

So I'm sorry to inform you, nothing in the world can defeat this other than hardware or additional physical protections like Faraday Cage. You're all delusional if you think Qubes OS will protect against this kind of insanity.

Furthermore, such attacks are carried out in controlled environments and with minimal or zero external interference. Being practically impossible to do in real scenarios. An example of this is the attack discovered in 2024 in which hackers use the friction sound caused by the finger on the cell phone screen to steal fingerprints.
https://www.ndss-symposium.org/wp-content/uploads/2024-618-paper.pdf

But this research and simulation was done in a precisely controlled environment, with precise sound capture and noise isolation equipment, and even with all this there is only a 27.9% chance for partial fingerprint and 9.3% for full fingerprint, even in the perfect scenario the chances are ridiculous. In other words, if the attack is carried out against a resident of India it will be useless, since the deafening and endless noise of vehicle horns would make it completely impossible.

So you all don't know anything about what you're talking about, you're throwing phrases around without even knowing how it works or what it means.

	> "What is the main concept behind Qubes?"
	> "To build security on the "Security by Compartmentalization (or Isolation)" principle."

"Building security on the principle of hope*, because we cannot guarantee that our compartmentalization will work. And we don't have other layers of protection because we don't believe in security through correction and randomization which is already common sense and used by everyone in the world of technology."

	> "What about safe languages and formally verified microkernels?"
	> "In short: these are non-realistic solutions today. We discuss this in further depth in our Architecture Specification document."

Wow, impressive. But wasn't Xen written in C/Assembly? And it's not formally verified either... 
So I hate to break it to you, but Qubes OS is completely vulnerable to memory management exploits.
But it's a shame you don't believe that.

	> "Why does Qubes use virtualization?"
	> "We believe that this is currently the only practically viable approach to implementing strong isolation while simultaneously providing compatibility with existing applications and drivers."

"We believe", "We believe", "We believe"... You know, it seems to me that you're all lunatics who deny reality and live only in your imaginary worlds of belief.
And what about the "compatibility" thing? This damn system isn't even compatible with the hardware, get out of here!

	> "unfortunate reality right now is that an operating system cannot be secure without a certain minimum number of proprietary closed-source "blobs" (e.g., CPU microcode updates). A 100% free operating system that excludes all such blobs is vulnerable to known exploits and is therefore unsuitable for any use case where security matters."

That's 100% false. Since when can only blobs vendors create secure and reliable code? On the contrary, how can code be secure and reliable without an audit proving it? 
This only allows many bugs and vulnerabilities (or even backdoors, since it's impossible to prove they don't exist) to remain hidden for a long time without being fixed.

OpenBSD is one of the most secure, if not the most secure, operating systems in the world, and is an example of an OS without proprietary blobs by default. But of course, it doesn't rely on processor virtualization technology to be secure, LOL.

	> "A core tenet of the Qubes philosophy is "distrust the infrastructure," where "the infrastructure" refers to things like hosting providers, CDNs, DNS services, package repositories, email servers, PGP keyservers, etc."
	
But you all trust Tor, don't you? Ultimately, they are your only recommendation for anonymity.

	> "As a project, we focus on securing endpoints instead of attempting to secure "the middle" (i.e., the infrastructure)"

How the hell can you be secure at the endpoint if you have to go through the insecure midpoint first? What kind of nonsense is that?

	> "since one of our primary goals is to free users from being forced to entrust their security to unknown third parties."
	
Like Xen and Whonix... cough... cough.

	> "Instead, our aim is for users to be required to trust as few entities as possible (ideally, only themselves and any known persons whom they voluntarily decide to trust)."
	
And Xen, right?

	> "We believe that many attempts to make the infrastructure appear trustworthy actually provide only the illusion of security and are ultimately a disservice to real users."
	
So, with this, you're admitting that your infrastructure isn't secure? Furthermore, you're literally sinking your users into a illusion of security through a single third-party tool.
Is there a greater disservice than that?

	> "Although we caution users against placing undue trust in this website because we distrust the infrastructure, we have no objection to enabling website security features when doing so is relatively costless and provides some marginal benefit to website visitors."
	
So you contradict yourselves when it's convenient.

	https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/user/templates/templates.html
	
	> "Each qube has read-only access to the template on which it's based, so if a qube is compromised, it cannot infect its template or any of the other qubes based on that template."
	
	The statement is not true. AppVMs have read-only access to the TemplateVM filesystem, so they cannot directly modify the template files while it is offline. However, if the template is started (for example, to install/update software) while compromised by network access or a malicious binary, the template can become infected; this then spreads to AppVMs that use that template. 
	RPC services (qrexec), shared folders, or copy/update mechanisms (e.g., updating packages in the template) can be abused by an attacker in an AppVM to perform actions that affect the template or influence qubes that receive data from it. And obviously, exploits in the hypervisor, dom0, or other attack surfaces of QubesOS can allow privilege escalation to alter templates or other qubes.
	Finally, a cloned template does not automatically receive patches from the original template; if an attacker compromises the "source" template before cloning, clones will remain compromised. And they themselves say:
	
	> "Updates are naturally centralized, since updating a template means that all qubes based on it will automatically use those updates after they're restarted."
	
	And you know what? What guarantees that the developers themselves cannot be compromised by large organizations and provide operating system images or even template updates that have already been maliciously compromised? OpenBSD and other operating systems can protect themselves against this in various ways, but what about Qubes OS?

	I considered continuing and refuting the entire Architecture Specification document, but that would only take up readers' time on many topics already discussed. However, I do intend to refute this entire PDF point by point, as it is the basis of the Qubes OS architecture, and it was written with terrible arguments by someone who understands almost nothing about security and software architecture, Joanna Rutkowska. 
	I'll probably just forget to do it, after all I don't get anything out of it.
	

# 16 — Terrible against zero-day attacks

	"A zero-day (also known as a 0-day) is a vulnerability or security hole in a computer system unknown to its developers or anyone capable of mitigating it. Until the vulnerability is remedied, threat actors can exploit it in a zero-day exploit, or zero-day attack."
	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero-day_vulnerability

	Qubes OS offers good damage control for failures in guest VMs, but its large virtualization-based TCB (Trusted Computing Base) makes it structurally more vulnerable to zero-days attacking privileged components than alternatives with smaller TCB, focus on correctness, and aggressive mitigators (GrapheneOS, OpenBSD, hardening/enterprise Linux distros). Here I will return to some points already discussed previously, but with the sole ultimate objective of proving something else.
	
	Qubes relies on compartmentalization via virtualization (Xen, dom0, VMs with separate privileges) as the main layer of defense, which can be good for reducing the individual impact of known vulnerabilities when the focus of attack is guest VMs and limiting blast radius. But defense against zero‑days depends on the probability of occurrence and the ease with which a failure can escape the box in which it is located; at this point Qubes loses completely.
	
	First, the hypervisor and the set of I/O drivers (firmware, controllers, devices) remain large privileged code written mostly in C/assembly, without formal verification; A zero-day that allows code execution on the hypervisor or DMA (Direct Memory Access) support can escape from a VM to dom0 or the hypervisor itself, compromising all compartments at once. And this is extremely easy, as the complexity of the entire Qubes OS together leads to a greater likelihood of bugs and certainly leads to a larger attack surface, especially when it comes to memory management.
	
	Second, the aggregate attack surface of Qubes is high. In addition to the hypervisor, there is the kernel(s) of multiple exposed hardware templates and drivers, IPC, hypercalls, grant, backends, control domains, grant mappings, emulation, firmware (TPM, Intel ME), PCIe/Thunderbolt, unprotected /boot partition and more — more code means more statistical probability of exploitable unknown bugs. Each component is an additional source of zero days; Qubes' "many moving parts" architecture increases the total surface area compared to systems with deliberately smaller TCBs.
	
	Third, modern mitigaters (ASLR, KARL, KPTI, retpoline, SELinux, namespaces, etc.) reduce or obfuscate the kernel's attack surface through isolation or randomization. Taking into account that QubesOS developers do not believe in security through randomization, kernel mitigations and code correction, this system has nothing that reduces or obfuscates its attack surface, as it does not even have VM spoofing, being completely visible to an attacker.
	
	Fourth, alternatives like GrapheneOS (designed for a hostile environment at the user and mobile kernel level) or OpenBSD (emphasis on code auditing and mitigation by default) reduce the chance of many zero-days occurring and exploited by having smaller stacks, more aggressive hardening policies, and less dependence on proprietary drivers; Linux implementations like Secureblue aim to protect not only against known but also unknown vulnerabilities (the same goes for the other 2 OSes mentioned above), reducing the attack surface, making elevation of privilege exploits much more difficult in principle.
	
	Fifth, Qubes OS is betting that zero-day vulnerabilities will be rare or non-existent, whether in Xen or in all other components/attack surfaces, but the reality is that all new software and hardware vulnerabilities are zero-day; every week, every month dozens or hundreds of zero-day vulnerabilities emerge that require fast and predictable patches, something that the QubesOS devs do not believe or cannot do (e.g., Xen is developed and maintained by other developers). So enterprise operating systems like RHEL, AlmaLinux, Rocky Linux, Ubuntu, FreeBSD; or operating systems focused on bug and vulnerability correctness like OpenBSD are the best at fixing new vulnerabilities, known as zero-days, extremely reducing the likelihood of you being affected by it.
	
	Finally, the Qubes security model assumes that compartmentalization will be the only and primary security; that's practical, but it's a horrible bet against a world that doesn't act as its developers think. When an effective zero-day arises against the hypervisor, or against privileged subsystems, compartmentalization does not fix or randomize the bug — it simply depends on the bug never existing or not being scalable. In comparison, systems with lower privileged TCB, audited code/smaller attack surface, and mitigations offer greater structural resistance to zero-day attacks.

	"QubesOS allows you to use OpenBSD and all these other operating systems inside qubes", you might say, and no, it doesn't. The only officially supported templates are Fedora and Debian, there are templates for other OSes maintained by the community, but they are not even actively updated or tested by Qubes OS devs, which further diminishes trust. 
	
	> "In all cases, the Qubes OS Project does not provide updates for these templates."
	> "In addition, these templates may be somewhat less stable, since the Qubes developers do not test them."
	https://doc.qubes-os.org/en/latest/user/templates/templates.html
	
	QubesOS is not even stable by default and yet they offer even more unstable ways to use it? How would this increase security (especially against zero-days)? You can't take this operating system seriously, not if you're like me and value security first.
	
	But even if it were possible this would further increase the surface attack (hypervisor + guest), the ideal defense is generally to reduce the TCB, not stack it and further increase the complexity and the propensity for bugs, that's not how security works. You can't accumulate more and more code and think that this will give you security, it's totally the opposite. And also Qubes templates are limited, they run modified versions of OSes and are paravirtualized, all of this is harmful when it comes to security. And again, what isolates the hypervisor from the guest operating system? Absolutely nothing.


## THE END ##

	QubesOS is not the best and not even a good alternative for those seeking security, nor anonymity because without security you can't maintain anonymity for a long time. This OS is for those who seek for a quick and easy control/dispatch of virtual machines, whether for testing or common use; and for those who in exchange for security want to be able to have and separate many profiles, whether for privacy or for work, or for both.
	Some of the topics and complaints in this article may apply to other Linux distributions and other operating systems, but only QubesOS fits all of them at the same time; it's unique in being such garbage. There are far superior alternatives when it comes to security and isolation, which i will talk about later. 

	For anonymity only, Tails is superior; but Whonix is stronger for security. You can use Whonix in any Linux system, systems that may even be safer than QubesOS and through the KVM that is a more secure virtualizer than Xen, as previously stated.

	Qubes OS's compartmentalization approach achieves useful risk‑reduction for desktop threat models, but its security guarantees are limited by architectural choices. A large privileged hypervisor (Xen) and dom0 form a concentrated TCB (Trusted Computing Base) with ongoing XSAs (Xen Security Advisory), paravirtualized interfaces make VMs easily fingerprintable and increase guest -> hypervisor channels. The system inherits Linux (Fedora/Debian) kernel and driver surface and Qubes depends on modern CPU microcode and a small set of certified hardware. 
	Disposable qubes mitigate persistence but do not remove the core high‑privilege attack surface. For high‑assurance server, high threat model or enterprise use where a minimized, auditable TCB, formal hardening, long support windows, and headless management are required — Qubes' desktop‑centric design is a misfit rather than a solution.

	An operating system designed by people who don't believe in security through clean code, bug fixes and mitigations cannot be trusted, because its developer base is not trustworthy.
	
	If your threat model doesn't involve serious and persistent adversaries, powerful organizations, or state actors, Qubes OS might be good for you. If you prioritize compartmentalization over stability and want to manage multiple aspects of your life simultaneously without worrying about servers, zero-day vulnerabilities, or hardware compatibility issues, then Qubes OS might be perfect for you. If your enemy consists of amateur hackers and common criminals, Qubes OS might be sufficient for you. It is appropriate against less capable adversaries, such as script kiddies and opportunistic criminals.
	
*Reality check*: Qubes suits solo enthusiasts trading manageability, stability, compatibility, predictability and security for experimental compartmentalization.


*Points to consider:* 

	I know that VMs bring compartmentalization at the OS level, it brings great ease in many aspects. But the sandbox at the user level is more safe in addition to being much less complex. An escape from this sandboxing limit an attacker to the user's context; an escape typically only grants user privileges, not hardware control. While a breach or control of the Hypervisor takes the attacker to the hardware. 
	
	There is no such thing as perfect security, much less perfect isolation, but there is security greater than QubesOS.
	
	I personally don't have much faith in virtual machines when it comes to security, and I think you shouldn't either. But in my opinion, the most reliable hypervisor is OpenBSD's, called VMM.
https://www.openbsd.org/faq/faq16.html
	That after much reluctance, even from the creator of OpenBSD, arrived at the system, but created from scratch to be safe, focused on absolute security, unlike all other existing hypervisors. And that's why it won't have some features like:

    graphics
    snapshots
    guest SMP support
    hardware passthrough
    live migration across hosts
    live hardware change 

Other than that, use KVM or even Hyper-V, it will serve you well and historically it's safer than Xen.

Other criticisms of QubesOS made by other people that you might want to see, but that doesn't mean I agree 100% with them (and may contradict what was said in this article):
https://www.pentest.es/Demystifying_QubesOS_Security.pdf
https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=41401318
https://simplifiedprivacy.com/the-case-against-qubesos.html
https://seclists.org/dailydave/2010/q3/29


*# My recommendations instead of QubesOS #*


*1- OpenBSD*
Simply the most secure operating system by default in the world. Designed from the beginning in 1995 for first-place security, it is an operating system with the ultimate goal of being the safest in the world. It was a NetBSD fork that until then is already an secure OS, but that did not please the paranoid and wise *Theo the Raadt (the creator)*. It is first focused on being safe in the code and then implementing mitigations. The main focus is on fixing bugs before fixing vulnerabilities, because every vulnerability is a bug, but not every bug is a vulnerability.
https://www.openbsd.org/

To understand how OpenBSD security and development work, and to learn about all the security protocols and innovations OpenBSD offers in this area:
https://www.openbsd.org/security.html

For a better understanding of why OpenBSD is so secure compared to other operating systems, read my other article: 
"Why OpenBSD solos?"
https://enjoys.rocks/?9dcbf4dd8c37541d#3t82JEm4LspHrAVdTfYoLzro9bBH25GpsiBZ5fevGKwL

OpenBSD is perfect for servers, after all it was created for that, but it's also excellent for desktops (I use it myself for daily driving, and I'm writing this article on it).


*2- FreeBSD*
"FreeBSD is an operating system for a variety of platforms which focuses on features, speed, and stability. Offers advanced networking, performance, security and compatibility features today which are still missing in other operating systems, even some of the best commercial ones."
https://www.freebsd.org/

FreeBSD has "jails," something no other operating system in the world has, and this provides a high level of isolation (through sandboxing), although it is not configured by default. Jails virtualize the access to the file system, the set of users, and the networking subsystem. This allows you to isolate the base system, services, network and Linux binaries in a very secure way, without depending on a hypervisor. You can achieve much more compartmentalization than with QubesOS and in a much simpler way, without spending many resources.
https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/jails/

AppJail allows for simpler and more refined control over jails:
https://appjail.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
https://appjail.readthedocs.io/en/latest/install/ 

And for QubesOS enthusiasts: https://github.com/BawdyAnarchist/quBSD

FreeBSD is an amazing operating system for everything. Servers, desktops, routers, and even gaming—it's actually the best BSD for gaming. You can play Steam games, although with less compatibility than on Linux, but through Wine you can achieve the same game compatibility as Linux. FreeBSD also has compatibility with Linux binaries through Linuxlator, unlike OpenBSD.

For proper installation and post-configuration, READ THE HANDBOOK:
https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/
For basic hardening and security understanding:
https://docs.freebsd.org/en/books/handbook/security/


*3- Gentoo Hardened*
This will take several days and maintenance is difficult, but it's the only way to have the highest possible security in a Linux operating system. In addition, it offers absolute minimalism and superior performance to any other existing operating system. Minimalist systems are always the best when it comes to low attack surface, and nothing in the Linux world does this better than Gentoo.

Gentoo can be considered the perfect Linux operating system, but only if you perform a proper installation and configuration. Please, read the fucking manual.

Handbook for a good installation:
https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Handbook
Hardening understanding:
https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Hardened/FAQ
Hardening guide (can be outdated):
https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Hardened_Gentoo
https://wiki.gentoo.org/wiki/Project:Hardened
https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html
https://github.com/xea/hardened-gentoo-hardened


*4- Fedora Secureblue*
Hardened Fedora Silverblue which is an immutable Fedora.

"Secureblue is a security-focused desktop and server Linux operating system. It is shipped as a set of OCI bootable container images, which are generated with BlueBuild, using Fedora Atomic Desktop's base images as a starting point."

It has several incredible kernel security patches in addition to SELinux enforcing policies. It uses GrapheneOS's hardened_malloc (most secure malloc) globally and implements security mitigations inspired by OpenBSD. This is the most secure Linux system by default. 
https://secureblue.dev/

Its only drawback is its use of SystemD, but this is undoubtedly outweighed by Secureblue impressive features.
https://secureblue.dev/features


*5- NetBSD*
"NetBSD is a free, fast, secure, and highly portable Unix-like Open Source operating system. It is available for a wide range of platforms, from large-scale servers and powerful desktop systems to handheld and embedded devices." It is the best operating system for embedded/IoT devices, boasting compatibility with an extraordinary variety of architectures and hardware.
However, it's not very user-friendly for desktop use.
https://www.netbsd.org/

NetBSD can also be extremely minimalist for those who know how to configure it, more so than any other BSD.

"Several security features are available in NetBSD, including IPsec, a homegrown firewall (NPF), a file integrity system (Veriexec), a kernel authorization framework (kauth(9)), disk encryption (CGD), among others.
In terms of exploit mitigations, NetBSD supports a good number of modern features: W^X (in both userland and the kernel), Userland ASLR, Kernel ASLR, SMEP, SMAP, and a variety of other internal kernel bug detection features."

To learn more about its security features and hardening:
https://man.netbsd.org/security.7
https://wiki.netbsd.org/security/

NetBSD has Wine and Linuxlator for natively running many Linux programs (although different from FreeBSD).


*6- Alpine Linux*
"Alpine Linux is a security-oriented, lightweight Linux distribution based on musl libc and busybox.
Was designed with security in mind. All userland binaries are compiled as Position Independent Executables (PIE) with stack smashing protection. These proactive security features prevent exploitation of entire classes of zero-day and other vulnerabilities."
https://alpinelinux.org/

It uses musl, BusyBox, and OpenRC instead of the more commonly used glibc, GNU Core Utilities, and systemd. This makes Alpine one of few Linux distributions not to be based on the GNU Core Utilities or glibc, which greatly reduced the attack surface. Sometimes I think of Alpine as "Linux if it were good". It is an excellent OS for Docker, widely used by the way.

Alpine have hardened_malloc (GrapheneOS malloc) native support, install it.
https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Hardened_mallocficial
For some hardening:
https://wiki.alpinelinux.org/wiki/Securing_Alpine_Linux


*7- Artix Linux Hardened*
Artix is Arch Linux but good (doesn't have SystemD).
"Artix uses real init systems, because PID1 must be simple, secure and stable."
https://artixlinux.org/

"Arch Linux is an independently developed, x86-64 general-purpose GNU/Linux distribution that strives to provide the latest stable versions of most software by following a rolling release model. The default installation is a minimal base system, configured by the user to only add what is purposely required. Arch Linux defines simplicity as without unnecessary additions or modifications."

With more than 15,000 packages available in the official repositories and with more than 95,000 available in the AUR (Arch User Repository), you will have access to all types of software in its most recent updates, Arch really stands out in this aspect. Not to mention other unofficial repositories, such as Chaotic-AUR, BlackArch and even EndeavourOS and Manjaro (2 Arch based distros). There's even a Chinese community repository with a bunch of amazing software. After Gentoo, this is the most minimalist (which, as mentioned earlier, reduces the attack surface) and fastest way to use Linux possible.

Just be careful when downloading packages from unofficial repositories (such as the AUR), because as they are maintained by the community, there may be malicious software, as has happened a few times. Always check who the maintainer is, the creation/update date, the origin of the build and the GPG signature of the repository and keyring.

By using this Linux distribution you will be blessed with the divine Arch Wiki. The best and most complete documentation in the Linux world.
https://wiki.archlinux.org
For proper hardening (you will take some days):
https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Security
https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html
hardened_malloc is available for download in the AUR, but I don't know if there's a guide on how to configure it in Arch:
https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/hardened_malloc


*8- TrueNAS*
"TrueNAS is a high performance data platform for managing any type of data, delivered through turnkey self-healing storage appliances and expert around-the-clock support."
https://www.truenas.com/

Built around the OpenZFS file system, TrueNAS provides a number of built-in file and block storage services as well as an OS-level virtualized app store (Linux containers and FreeBSD jails respectively) and virtual machine hypervisor to host additional services. It receives constant and solid security updates, in addition to a good audit by the developers.

The products consist of TrueNAS Enterprise and TrueNAS Community Edition. TrueNAS Enterprise is a family of storage appliances, with fully integrated software and hardware, that is sold as a commercial product with enterprise support. TrueNAS Community Edition can be installed for free on commodity x86-64 computers.

If your goal is to manage long-term data in a secure, stable and reliable way, TrueNAS Community Edition (or Enterprise, you choose) is one of the best alternatives. As it is based on FreeBSD, it inherits many of its advantages, as well as having full Linux support. It's an excellent operating system for servers or for long-term offline storage. 
Nothing better than OpenZFS for this, the best file-system of all in my opinion, it has an insane data compression and native encryption. ZFS compression is capable of compressing files by 2x or more, meaning that if you have 500GB of disk storage, you will be able to store up to ~1TB of data.
(OpenZFS is available natively for FreeBSD, also available for NetBSD and others. It is also available for Linux, although in an experimental and unstable with many incompatibilities).


*9- Kicksecure*
"Kicksecure is a free and open-source Linux distribution that aims to provide a highly secure computing environment. It has been developed from the ground up according to a formidable -- and time proven -- defense in-depth security design. In the default configuration, Kicksecure provides superior layered defenses of protection from many types of Malware.

Kicksecure is a complete computer operating system. Numerous applications come pre-installed with safe defaults which can be used immediately upon installation with minimal user input."

This distribution is an extensively reconfigured version of the Debian base, in terms of security, and is the base system for Whonix. For users familiar with the ease of use of Debian, this may be the best option.
After Secureblue (and probably Alpine), this is the most secure Linux distribution by default.
https://www.kicksecure.com/


*10- RHEL, Rocky Linux and AlmaLinux respectively*
These are the best Linux operating systems for businesses that want robust enterprise security, fast and tested updates and patches, binary compatibility with the RHEL ecosystem, long lifecycles to reduce churn, commercial support (or third-party support options), standards compliance (SELinux, Secure Boot, FIPS/benchmarks via partners), low attack surface (in the Linux way) and operational predictability—while keeping total cost of ownership controlled and providing a stable experience suitable for both advanced users and home administrators.
https://www.redhat.com/en/technologies/linux-platforms/enterprise-linux
https://almalinux.org/
https://rockylinux.org/

Rocky Linux supports hardened_malloc (experimental):
https://sig-security.rocky.page/packages/hardened_malloc/

However, I have to give my opinion about Red Hat. I don't like this IBM-slave organization at all; it poisons the Linux world, and I believe its main objective is to centralize the Linux ecosystem in its hands. But it's undeniable that its systems and software are excellent and difficult to match in the business world.


# *For Linux systems that support it, I also recommend installing LKRG (Linux Kernel Runtime Guard) and hardened_malloc:*
https://lkrg.org/
https://github.com/GrapheneOS/hardened_malloc
And for a general linux hardening guide (can be outdated):
https://madaidans-insecurities.github.io/guides/linux-hardening.html


-- HardenedBSD is a FreeBSD fork focused on absolute security, with dozens of implementations and technologies that FreeBSD or even OpenBSD does not have. This can be the most secure OS of all times but i do not understand much about it and the development of this OS seems a mess, with few devs (or only one?). Better than Linux anyway.
(If any user or developer wants to explain more about this OS I would love it, but even the official website is confusing).
https://hardenedbsd.org/

-- GrapheneOS is a privacy and security focused mobile OS with Android app compatibility developed as a non-profit open source project. GrapheneOS is also much more reliable and secure than QubesOS (and every linux distro) but is for phones.
https://grapheneos.org/
	It is possible to completely separate profiles, with each profile containing its own libraries and programs in the system, and it is even possible to create completely offline profiles with data isolation. A safer, simpler and less complex form of isolation than Qubes OS.

-- NixOS has everything to be a very secure Linux system, if it weren't for that damned SystemD. All the system's default configuration and behavior remains in one file, making the system reproducible, declarative and stable. It also has an incredible repository and package manager.
https://nixos.org/
However, a light shines in this Linux distro: SixOS.
"sixos: a nix os without systemd":
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gSW3YJ8uyBI
https://codeberg.org/amjoseph/sixos

But it's still under development? I don't even know how to install it. But in that case, NixOS would probably be above hardened Artix.

-- SculpOS/GenodeOS have a very, insane strong security. It has a micro-kernel formally verified focused on extreme security called Sel4. But it is not a system for general use, you cannot do much in it. Have so much potential.
https://genode.org/

-- RedoxOS is a complete Unix-like microkernel-based operating system written from scratch in Rust, with a focus on security, reliability and safety. Have so much potential but you can't do much on it too besides playing balatro.
https://www.redox-os.org/

-- Linux from Scratch (LFS): Stay away from this, it's extremely complex and unrewarding. You can't achieve much more security than Gentoo, and even its official guide uses SystemD as a base (It's possible to do it without them, but only experimentally and without many guides.). 
	Maintenance would be very difficult and extremely risky; it's literally creating your own Linux distro. Unless you're a crazy wizard and have months of free time along with advanced knowledge of Linux systems, please don't try it. But it's undeniable that this is the most minimalist way to use Linux, or are there other ways? Perhaps "Linux from nothing".
	I've done it before, so I can confidently say it's not worth it, even though it's a lot of fun hehehe.
	
-- Openwall GNU/*/Linux: It could be interesting, more research and understanding is needed.
https://www.openwall.com/Owl/


Also read my 2 other articles, previously mentioned. They were posted to an instance of privatebin (which is written in Rust) called RockBin, it is private, secure and encrypted. But unfortunately javascript is required to render the page, although the articles are just plain text:

"The C language and its biggest problem; proving its insecurity":
https://enjoys.rocks/?cba34693c3575800#BoMTRo1mr21sVCASvSAShR1tk5kPNdT5W6MyqQZ3nKxc
"Why OpenBSD solos?":
https://enjoys.rocks/?9dcbf4dd8c37541d#3t82JEm4LspHrAVdTfYoLzro9bBH25GpsiBZ5fevGKwL



	"An idiot admires complexity, a genius admires simplicity.
	 For an idiot, anything more complicated is the more he will admire it,
	 if you make something so cluster fucked he can't understand it, he's gonna
	 think you're a god. Cause you made it so complicated nobody can understand it."
										— Terry A. Davis, TempleOS creator.



El Psy Kongroo!
